---
title: "1.Variables and datatypes"
description: ""
date: "2026-02-05"
---



Javascript is the main language on web front end.

console.log("TO print something on screen")

Data types:

2 types:

1. Primitives:
		Numbers -> integers , decimal etc
		String -> 
		Boolean -> 
		
2. Derived types


Varialbes : They are just container holding some value. Two steps

	1. Declaration - Reserve a piece of memory 
	2. Assignment -  = 

```javascript
var x; // decalaration
let y;

x = 20; // assigning
y = 23;

var age = 5; // initialization
```

var keyword

Redeclation is allowed in javascript with var keyword

```javascript

var x=10;
var x=20; //redeclaration
```

const ketyword can also be used to create a variable.

```javascript

const x = 10;

```

const variable can not reassigned or redeclare the value.
Let keyword:
It can be reassigned but redeclaration is not allowed.

In reality variable is a label to a memory location which stores some value.
When we assign a value to a varible either directly or by assigning one variable to other(eg b=a) a new copy of that value is created and the variable points to it.

> [!NOTE]
> \=\= compares only values whereas \=\=\= compares value and data type
> \=\= is called loose equlity check and \=\=\= is called strong equilaty chack.
> For objects comparison ==  and === check for memory location not values.



> [!NOTE] Undefined
> Undefined means a variable is declared but not assigned any value. Automatically assigned by javascript.
> Null on the other hand has to be assigned and explicitely represents "no value".
> NAN -> not a number is a result of invalid number operation. Its type is number


