---
title: "5.Math functions and functions"
description: ""
date: "2026-02-05"
---



```javascript
Math.floor(23.5) // 23
Math.PI // certain constants are prebuilt in js
Math.max()
Math.min()
Math.abs()
Math.sqrt()
```

#### Anonymous functions

Simply functions with no name are called anonymous functions.

```javascript
// anonymous function
function(){

}
// assigning value to variable
var call = function(){

}
// calling 
call();
```


> [!NOTE] Function expression
> Functions without => (fat arrow) are called function expressions.Function expression and arrow function differ in way of handling of this keyword.
> **Arrow Functions**: Lexically bind the this value, meaning they inherit this from the surrounding context where they are defined. This makes them unsuitable for methods or functions that need their own this context.- **Function Expressions**: Have their own this context, which is dynamically determined based on how the function is called. This makes them suitable for methods where this needs to refer to the object calling the method.

```javascript 
// alternative syntac removed function
let call = (){

}
// or added arrow
let call = ()=>{

}

()=>{} // is called fat arrow or jsut  arrow

// we can remove parenthesis if only one statement
()=>
let call = ()=>console.log(5);

// last expression will be evaulted also 

let call = ()=>10;
call()
```

- All the primitive data types are passed by value.Any changes that we make in the passed item with not reflect in the original item.
- All the non primitive data types are passed by reference.Arrays, objects and functions all are passed by reference.Any changes that we make in the passed item will reflect in the original item.
- **Copying Behavior:** Copying a primitive type creates a new copy, but copying an object or array creates a reference to the same memory location.

> [!NOTE] Title
> In JavaScript, **you cannot directly pass a primitive (like `number`, `string`, `boolean`) by reference** because:Primitives are immutable and always passed by value.
>  
>  However, you can simulate **pass-by-reference for primitives** by **wrapping them in an object** or **using a class**.



> [!NOTE] Spread syntax
> Spread syntax can be used when all elements from an object or array need to be included in a new array or object.
> If any changes are made in the new object or array  those will not reflect in the original object or array.
> 
> The rest operator is denoted by three dots (…) and is used to represent an indefinite number of arguments as an array. It is typically used in function parameters to gather all remaining arguments into an array.
> 
> The spread operator is also denoted by three dots (…) and is used to unpack elements from an array or object. It allows us to spread the elements of an array or object into another array or object.

```javascript
// rest
function sum(...numbers) { return numbers.reduce((total, num) => total + num, 0); } console.log(sum(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)); // Output: 15
//spread
const arr1 = [1, 2, 3]; const arr2 = [4, 5, 6];
const combinedArray = [...arr1, ...arr2];
console.log(combinedArray); // Output: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]

// one way of deep copy
let copied = {...obj};
let copied_arr = [...arr];
```

Finally functions can take default paramters 

```js
function greet(message="Hello world"){

}
```

Functions can be passed as parameter to other functions. Also functions can be defined inside other functions so they get the entire env of outher functions and continue to hold these variables even if outer function goes out of scope. 

```js
function x(y){
	y();
}

x(()=>{
	console.log("Hello world");
})

```

