# 6.Scope , Hoisting And Callbacks

---

- The scope is the extent to which a variable is accessible while executing the code.
Scope can of function , global or block level.

Global scope varialbles are accesssible anywhere in code. Just define variable anywjere in program.

> [!NOTE] Local scope
> If we want a variable to be accessible locally in the program we define it:
> 1. Within a function (Function scope  - var ) meaning its scope spans the total function
> 2. Within a block (Block scope - let & const) meaning its scope is only in the block in which declared.

- Block scope is a local scope bounded between two curly brackets {}.The block scope lets you limit the accessibility of all variables declared inside it.

- Variables declared using  let or const, can’t be accessed outside the curly brackets {}
-  Variables declared using var, can be accessed outside the curly brackets {}.

> [!NOTE] Lexical scope
> - Lexical scope is ability for a inner scope to access variables from the outer scope.
> - That means inner scope is lexically bound to the outer scope.

### Hoisting:

- Hoisting is a JavaScript mechanism where variables and function declarations are moved to the top of their scope before code execution. **Remember “Function Declarations” are hoisted entirely.**
- **Variable declarations** using `var` are also hoisted, but only the declaration is moved—not the initialization.
- Let is hoisted but it remains in temporal dead zone. Meaning javascript knows it exist not is not usable and will give refernce error.
```javascript
console.log(x); // ❌ ReferenceError
let x = 5;

```

```javascript
var greet = function() {
    console.log("Hello!");
};

```

Only the **variable declaration** (`var greet`) is hoisted. The **function definition** (`function() { ... }`) is **not** hoisted.

So internally it behaves like

```javascript
var greet; // hoisted declaration

greet(); // error
// At this point, greet is undefined
greet = function() {
    console.log("Hello!");
};

```

In contrast function declaration are fully hoisted.
```javascript
greet(); // ✅ Works fine
function greet() {
    console.log("Hello!");
}

```

Now it function expression is defined using let keyword even varialble will not be hoisted.

```javascript
func();  // error : Cannot access func before initialization.
let func = function(){
    console.log("Hello");
}

```

#### Callback

In JavaScript, a callback is a function passed into another function as an argument to be executed later.

- Callbacks make sure that a function is not going to run before a task is completed but will run right after the task has been completed.

```javascript

// way 1 normal function

function greet(n){
    // do something
}
function recept(param){
    var n=5;
    param(n);
}
recept(greet);

```

```javascript
let greet = function(n1){
    // do something
}

function rec(param){
    var x = 5;
    param(x);
}
rec(greet);
// or

rec(function(n){
    // do something
})

```

```javascript
let greet = ()->{
    // do something
}
rec(greet);
rec(()->{console.log("Hello")});

```

### Closures

- Closure = Function + Lexical Environment
- If a function is created inside another function, it retains access to the scope of that outer function even after that outer function returns, because the outer function is in the lexical scope of the function.
- A closure is a function that remembers the environment or scope in which it was created. This means it retains access to the variables in its lexical scope even after the outer function has returned.

```javascript
function outerFunction(outerVariable) {
    return function innerFunction(innerVariable) {
        console.log('Outer Variable:', outerVariable);
        console.log('Inner Variable:', innerVariable);
    };
}
const newFunction = outerFunction('outside');
newFunction('inside'); // outerVariable still is present after outer has ended.

```

> [!NOTE] Use
> Closures are often used to create private variables or functions. Since JavaScript doesn’t have built-in support for private variables, closures can encapsulate variables, making them accessible only to certain functions. This is useful for data encapsulation and object data privacy.
